+++
title = "On Making Sense"
date = 2024-09-03T20:50:03+02:00
lastmod = 2024-09-03T20:50:03+02:00
description = "A story and a thought or two."
draft = false
+++

*Note: This post contains some philosophical passages about religion and
nihilism. Those are not, in any way, intended to convert, condemn or offend
anyone, merely to show my personal view on it all. And mind you, I certainly do
not know anything more about the way of the world than you do, so please take
everything with a grain of salt. And if you want to chat with me about any of
it, I'd [love to](/contact/).*

A few months back I was talking to a girl at the birthday party of a friend of
mine and, after conversing about making music and creativity in general for a
while, she asked me whether I did any writing. I (awkwardly) answered something
along the lines of:

"Yeah, just a little bit, though … I've started a blog[^1], but there's not a lot on
there … Nothing that makes much sense …"

[^1]: This was in March, I believe, which means that this blog had about two or
    three posts at that time, which is, admittedly, not a lot less than it does
    now.

She looked at me with a chuckle, amused by my apparently quite noticeable
embarassement, and proceeded to ask:

"Ha, okay. What then, *does* make sense to you?"

Now, this is a topic I *have* actually thought about quite bit, and I would
have liked to say something terribly well thought-out and philosophical about
it, but, alas, my conversational eloquency has suffered *a lot* since I
graduated gymnasium[^2] and went through my mandatory military service (or at
least that's how I excuse these things to myself), which led to me saying
something stupid, like:

[^2]: Gymnasium is a kind of grammar school here in Switzerland, which one has
    to complete before being able to start university. [→
    Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gymnasium_(school))

"Playing the piano, I guess?"

Yeah. I know.

So I thought I might as well write a post on reasonability, which would
hopefully help in ordering my thoughts on things of this nature into some
coherent picture again, after they'd been so violently jumbled about by worries
about troop morale, combat exercises, and the incredible inexperience and
incompetence on both my and my superior officers' parts[^3].

Maybe I'd even find a smidge of wisdom or two that might be floating around in
this still troubled mind of mine. Who knows.

[^3]: That's a different story, albeit one I still can't seem to shake. It's one
    of those ones I will *have* to get out of my system and onto a page at some
    point, I think. But it's not ready to be written. Not yet.

Let's see.

Now, I have great respect for religion and I agree with many of the basic
notions of protestant christianity I grew up with, things like "love thy
neighbor", "thou shalt not murder", "thou shalt not steal", et cetera, which I
percieve to be keystones of all that is good and right. But what I do not do
anymore is believe in any higher power or purpose to life.

Stopping to believe[^4], losing the certainty that there will always be someone
who has a plan for my life, losing the certainty that there is a sense to it
all, losing the certainty that everything will be alright in the end, was quite
frightening. It can feel quite lonely, and seems quite sad, to believe in
*nothing*.

[^4]: Losing my religion, one might say. ;)

But, I have to say, it is extremely liberating. Because, like this, with there
being no inherent sense, no plan, no order, to anything, *we ourselves* get to
decide what the sense to *our* lives is for *us*. And this fact, knowing (or
*believing*, I should say) that ultimately, *nothing matters*, except to
ourselves, can relieve quite a lot of pressure and anxiety[^5].

[^5]: All these thoughts touch on a specific group of philosophical views
    called "optimistic nihilism". If you want to learn more about this, there
    is a good [video](https://youtu.be/MBRqu0YOH14?si=9YiPoyxXf8wY5WdK) by
    [kurzgesagt](https://www.youtube.com/@kurzgesagt) you can watch. :)

Which leads me to the original question: "What *does* make sense to me?"

Or, maybe more precisely: "What makes sense *of* me?"

It's a tough one. I once thought I knew, and I think I *did* know once. I think
I could've expressed all of it in a single sentence, but right now, I feel like
I know nothing anymore, like whenever I look into my heart, nothing but a
silently malicious black hole stares back at me, grinning and waiting to devour
the next emotion that might have the audacity to start growing in there.
Sometimes I even have a hard time telling right from wrong, and that scares me.
A lot.

But I'll try to write an answer. Right now. I think it will do me good.

falling in love

helping a friend in need

helping a stranger in need

marvelling at the beauty of a late summer sunset

bonfire conversations beneath a starry sky

sitting inside during a thunderstorm, a cup of tea and a good book in hand

learning something new and exciting about the world

teaching someone curious about the world exciting things about it

creating something that makes someone else's life better

making music

listening to music

Those were more than one answer. But I'll take it. Because I think what it all
boils down to, eventually, is something along the lines of this:

"I want to do the things I love doing, be with the people I love being with and I
want to leave the world with just a little bit more *good* in it than there was
before I happened to come along."

That is the sense *I* make.

---

Phew. That was something. Terribly sorry for the lack of direction and the
tough topic, but this was one that just had to get *out*. And I think most of
it did. Not all of it, but most of it. And that is enough.
